so once you understand what the origin
of the disease is or the disorder then
it becomes to us it becomes extremely
clear how you can effectively manage
cancer without toxicity you just have to
pull the plug on the two fuels that
drive the fermentation metabolism while
transitioning the entire body over to
fatty acids and ketones that the tumor
cells cannot use for fuel
oh
ladies and gentlemen this is the muscle
intelligence podcast I'm your host Ben
pakolski today's podcast is everything
about cancer if you or anyone you know
has ever
experienced cancer or suffered through
cancer you're going to want to pay
attention listen to this podcast grab a
pen grab a piece of paper take some
notes because this is an absolute Game
Changer a man who has led the way in
cancer research for a number of years
now Tom C free Dr Tom C free joins me
today and we really uncover the
metabolic truths of cancer cancer as a
metabolic disease not certainly a
genetic disease and one that seems to be
absolutely preventable absolutely
treatable and something that I hope we
can all cure across the board in the
future talk to her Tom Seyfried as a
professor at Boston College he's been
doing this for over 30 years he's
studied all the way back to
Otto Warburg through Hans Krebs all
these just icons in the Science World
when it comes to metabolism and
understanding metabolism and his lab has
recently discovered the two Pathways
that are driving cancer ultimately the
fermentation process that we need to
prevent and we're going to describe that
and ultimately how to overcome it in
this podcast ladies and gents thanks for
being here I always appreciate you being
a listener of the muscle intelligence
podcast being a part of our amazing
Community listen to this podcast are
certainly people who want to pursue
personal Excellence personal performance
and also we get the most out of every
single day I often talk about an
optimized daily experience as being the
objective what should I be doing from
time I wake up to the time I go to bed
and this is something you may want to
consider adding to your yearly
repertoire certainly a ketogenic
approach to uh optimization of life and
Dr Thompson is going to tell us about
that so much more today's podcast is
brought to you by our friends at by
optimizers yet again coming back at you
with an incredible offer mag
breakthrough for the longest period of
time this product has been in my
medicine cabinet in my vitamin drawer
and it's something I just take every day
I give it to my kids now every day
because I think magnesium is just so
depleted in our food supply if you're at
all stressed if you're at all training
hard uh magnesium is going to be
something you want to add in I think I
love about mag breakthrough is that it's
got seven different chelates so I can
get all these different types of
magnesium or all these different types
of absorption rates and they tend to
work or affect different tissues in
different ways and I really like that
and some work for other some people in
some work for others
with seven different chelates you're
going to get full coverage of magnesium
to be totally optimized so shout out to
buy optimizers that's
b-i-o-p-t-i-m-i-z-e-r-s.com by
optimizers.com
muscle intelligence or just go to buy
optimizers.com use the code muscle10 for
their entire product line which now is
just so extensive everything from their
new amazing new Topia products my
breakthrough and everyone should be
taking mass times as well capex is a
product we absolutely love they've got
some incredible collagen products as
well ladies and gents enjoy this podcast
and when you're done head over to buy
optimize.com and check out our amazing
show sponsors
[Music]
Dr Tom seifried thank you very much for
joining me sir as I mentioned just
before recording I'm a massive fan of
your work and look forward to digging
into understanding cancer as a metabolic
disease well thank you very much ben
it's nice to be here I appreciate you
making a time I'm sure many of my
listeners may have heard you on Peter
Tia's podcast as well as many other
places where your information is present
I think it's incredibly powerful what
you're doing I think the world needs to
understand more about the metabolic
implications of Health as well as the
metabolic implications of cancer in
general and it seems like your study and
your evolution of understanding of
cancerous metabolic diseases has
actually evolved a lot in the last few
years certainly since the first time
you're on Peter's podcast which I think
it was 2018.
um so I'd love to maybe have you give a
bit of a background into how you got
into understanding cancer which you did
on his podcast and then we could we
could shift into some deeper
conversation yeah well thank you Ben you
know I I've been here at BC for uh 30
almost 35 years and uh before that I was
at Yale University in New Haven uh for
nine years
so um but I I didn't really get into
cancer as a metabolic disease until
around the year 2000 most of the time I
was doing basic biochemistry of epilepsy
and brain development and cancer but not
not in the context of knowing about its
origin or trying to manage it we started
we we had done a lot of work in the
field of epilepsy I was uh head of the
ketogenic diet special interest group
for epilepsy where ketogenic diets have
been used to manage epilepsy since the
1920s by Wilder at the Mayo Clinic and
it was only because water only fasting
would reduce epileptic seizures and you
could only do that for a certain period
of time
before the patient would expire from
starvation so he developed a diet that
would behave cause blood work to change
in the way
water only fasting would do that and lo
and be all many of the epileptic
seizures disappeared or were managed to
become far fewer in incidents but you
know we had been doing analysis of
angiogenesis and cancer and calorie
restriction and looking at calorie
restrictions reducing of angiogenesis
which is abnormal vasculature of tumors
but then we started to find out that
what is calorie restriction or water
only fasting was having a tremendous
effect on these tumors and the mice
and at the same time we were doing
ketogenic diets and calorie restriction
for epilepsy so we just said we had the
best animal models for both epileptic
seizures as well as
various models for brain cancer and
which we developed here at Boston
College first at Yale University and
then at Boston College to do mostly
biochemistry work on these things but
then we started to get into the
management phase of of looking at what's
going on you know what is how is it
possible that calorie restriction in the
mouse which is comparable to water only
fasting in the human was having such a
profound effect on blood vessel reducing
blood vessels killing the tumor cells
reducing inflammation doing all these
different kinds of things and at the
same time in a different completely
different model was managing epileptic
seizures and mice that had seizures
now we we never really figured out how
the these diets were managing epileptic
seizures we only knew one thing that was
very interesting in both kids children
and the epileptic mice that is if you
maintain low steady blood sugar uh it
seemed like the seizures would be
managed even even the ketones even if
they were up uh they didn't always have
to be at the same level they just had to
be elevated but it seemed like and then
every now and then a kid that was
managed with seizures for long periods
of time would take a bite of a cookie or
a juice and within a few minutes explode
into a violent seizure so and the blood
sugar would spike at that the moment the
sugar elevated that seizure appeared in
many of the cases or within a half an
hour of the of the spike it was very it
was very uh quick onset despite the fact
that the seizures had been managed for
such a long period of time and we also
knew that any child that liked large
amounts of ketogenic diet the very rare
that you find anybody who likes this
stuff but every now and you've got a kid
that liked it and they were unable those
children were unable to manage their
epileptic seizures because they ate so
much fat their blood sugars couldn't go
down it was linked to insulin
insensitivity and we and we found the
exact same thing in the mouse as well
so when we shifted over more to the
metabolic management of cancer we we had
a vast knowledge base of diet work for
epilepsy and we knew about ketogenic
diets for epilepsy we knew about calorie
restriction so then when we started to
look at the outcome of cancer in the
brain or in other areas we could then
follow biomarker changes in the body
with uh changes in the in the uh the
tumor how big it was how far it
metastasized and these kinds of things
so we we that's how we we got into it
and then and then gradually it became
clear that I was trained as a
biochemical geneticist at the University
of Illinois so I and I did a lot of
mouse genetics in my career and of
course everyone had been indoctrinated
into the world view that cancer was a
genetic disease but when I saw the
changes in metabolism and changing
glucose and ketones and how powerful it
was in managing cancer that the growth
of these tumor cells and in both humans
and in mice I began to question the
whole concept of the what the National
Cancer Institute in the world pretty
pretty much think what cancer is and
then it became clear to me that these
genes are all Downstream effects these
gene mutations uh of effects of a
disturbed energy metabolism so it's the
Disturbed energy metabolism that
actually causes the genetic
abnormalities making the entire cancer
into history and field seriously
question because most of their new
therapies the way they treat patients
and these kinds of things are based on
the dogmatic view that cancer is a
genetic disease and I did some studies
with nuclear transfer mitochondrial
transfer experiments reviewing these
kinds of studies that completely
undermines this whole view that cancer
is a genetic disease so once you make up
your mind that this is not a genetic
disease and then you begin to look at
all the kinds of treatments that people
are given for uh for cancer management
like the immunotherapies and radiation
chemo and all this kind of stuff it's
all based on on the somatic mutation
theory of cancer which is flawed it's
it's it's no longer a credible
explanation for the disease it's clearly
a metabolic disease as Otto werberg
originally said Warburg clearly argued
in the 1920s and 30s that cancer was a
metabolic type disease and we have
solidified what werberg said and then
took it one greater step forward and
showed that what the actual fuels are
that are fermented to generate energy
within the tumor cell so now it becomes
clear how to manage cancer once you
understand what the origin of the
disease is or the disorder then it
becomes to us it becomes extremely clear
how you can effectively manage cancer
without toxicity you just have to pull
the plug on the tube fuels that drive
the fermentation metabolism while
transitioning the entire body over to
fatty acids and ketones that the tumor
cells cannot use for fuel so you simply
marginalize their their existence in the
body and slowly degrade them and you can
do that for with a variety of different
approaches that we're currently
investigating here in the lab dosage
timing and scheduling so it's a long
process you know you don't wake up one
day and say Hey you know I'm going to
overturn the entire cancer industry it
it pretty much comes gradually as you as
you read other papers and you do the
experiments yourself in the lab and
Things become more and more clear as to
as to what's actually going on so come
back here for a sec Tom so just to
summarize and make sure I'm accurate on
something you said there it sounds like
while a low carbohydrate carbohydrate
restricted diet is an important or no
carbohydrate diet is important piece at
all also must be in a caloric deficit
because these children are overeating on
the fats that cause the insulin
resistance in children you have to be
very very careful because they're at a
growth they're growing they're growing
and uh it becomes um a careful that's
why our our dietitians and nutritionists
that work in the epilepsy field like
Beth the zoo pet Kenya uh Helen cross
and a variety of others
um there when you when you work with
kids you you have to balance the
nutritional capabilities of the diet
with the ability of the diet to maintain
seizure control so
um it's it's not as simple as you think
um you really and the kids of course are
the parents make very uh the parents are
in control of the child's diet and
health so their their work walking the
fine line of not disturbing natural
normal development while at the same
time trying to prevent breakthrough
seizures so again if you're too
aggressive uh you you could undermine
the nutritional capabilities of the diet
so you have to be very careful you don't
want to cause you don't want to cause
growth retardation uh you don't want to
lead to adverse effects so it's a it's a
balancing act a nutritional micro and
macronutrient Balancing Act for kids
adults have a you have a lot uh you can
do a lot more you're not worried about
the the growth the growth issues any
longer you're just worried about you
know maintaining seizure control now
with the adults they don't they would
prefer drugs than ketogenic diets they
have free will now they're not
controlled by their parents any longer
so if there's a drug that could manage
an epileptic seizure they prefer to take
that than do the diet but I I know many
adults who do a combination of both
as far as the follow-up question to that
was is does it seem as though that a
ketogenic diet is effective for all
types of cancer at all stages or is it
specific cancers that tend to be
resistant to it well what we're finding
now it's almost a diet as long as it's a
nutritious diet it doesn't really make
any difference what you eat we develop
the glucose Ketone index calculator
which pretty much says that if you could
get your glucose Ketone ratio in the
blood down to 2.0 or below
it it serves as a powerful inhibitor of
cancer growth so if if a person can do
that on a vegan diet a carnivore diet a
pescatarian diet a ketogenic diet a
Mediterranean diet doesn't make any
difference we use ketogenic diet so
simply maybe a little bit easier to do
it that way but not to say that a vegan
diet it's a vegan diets are harder to do
it it's more difficult it takes longer
because there's more carbs and plants
than there is in animal fat animals
protein yeah but can you describe that
ratio exactly so I just want to
understand that yeah so it it's the
ratio of blood glucose and millimolar to
blood ketones and millimolar the meter
the keto Mojo meter Dominic uses this
constantly and Dominic is somebody
that's in constant ketosis uh he's
always measuring his his ratios but but
you can get it from Amazon uh the
glucose Ketone index money from keto
Mojo and you have to take a PR uh you
stick your finger and you get a drop of
blood
and with one strip it'll tell you what
the glucose level is and with it with
another strip it'll tell you what the
Ketone level is and it's simply the
ratio of glucose to ketones and if you
can get 1.0 or below where what meaning
that the ratio of glucose to ketones in
the blood is is equal or that ketones
are actually higher than glucose then
the tumor cells if you have if you are
someone with cancer then the tumor cells
are struggling for their existence under
those conditions they need they
absolutely need the glucose as a fuel
and they can't burn or use ketones or
fatty acids as a fuel so so when you
when you take these diets in you look at
your blood work and you see what your uh
what your ratio of blood glucose to
Ketone is and generally what we see in
the cancer
is that once the patient and I don't do
this I'm not a physician so I don't
treat any patients but my cut my
physician colleagues do
and what we see is that once the can
once the patient can be into a gki ratio
of 2.0 or below then we add on some
additional drugs and procedures that
will Target glutamine the other fuel
that's used as a as a as a fermentable
fuel you have to do that very carefully
because glutamine is an important amino
acid hyperbaric oxygen now becomes a a
procedure so we we developed the the um
oppressed pulse concept for for managing
cancer that incorporates all of the
things that I'm saying uh we published
this the framework of it giving
Physicians a clear conceptual idea of
the method that you would use to manage
cancer and now we're flushing it out
with a very detailed comprehensive
treatment protocol that we have yet to
publish but we're working on that but
the the framework for pressed pulse
metabolic therapy you can press glucose
down very very low without harming the
body as long as the body can burn
ketones
um which is an evolutionary abdat
patient to low blood sugar but the
cancer cells absolutely need the glucose
where the body can can switch from
glucose to ketones so they don't need
the glucose as as importantly as the
cancer does the cancer cells too so once
they're in that zone then you can start
chipping away at them at their glutamine
and uh and hyperbaric oxygen now causes
oxidative stress
and starts killing killing cancer cells
using oxidative that would that could
replace radiation therapy as a as an
alternate radiation kills cancer by
oxidative stress but it also damages
local tissues whereas hyperbaric oxygen
will will strike only the cancer cells
enhancing the health of the of the
normal tissue as long as the patient is
in a state of therapeutic ketosis so I'd
love to hear more about this glutamine
pathway it's obviously not consuming
dietary glutamine may lead us to
reducing dietary protein is that a
belief I know it's dumb because dominant
tends to move we're testing that right
now
um the glutamine issue is very
interesting
um the cancer cells need the glutamine
but sodium is your normal immune system
your gut you recycle we it's a very
essential amino acid for so many
physiological properties but we that's
why we pulse it
um we talk we take drugs that can Target
glutamine utilization but we use them
very strategically and for a short
period of time what drug is that Tom uh
well right now we're using six deoxyn or
leucine Don
um it's not approved it was used in
little kids with leukemias and it was
used for a variety of other cancer
patients in phase two trials but they
said it was too toxic
and the problem is they gave it in too
high of a dose without uh knowing that
you could
massively enhance the therapeutic
potential if the patient is in a state
of therapeutic ketosis consequently the
dosages that you need are now much much
lower so the toxicity that issue becomes
a non-issue so again without knowing how
to use the tools that are available and
understanding the biology and
biochemistry of the problem you can be
throwing out very important drugs that
when used in a different context can
have super power and as a matter of fact
we just found out that for another drug
divimistat which is a a drug that was
used for human pancreatic cancer and I
think it's still in some trials but the
results have been not good the patients
did not respond really well and they're
reconsidering whether this is going to
be a very a valuable drug well we we
took that drug to limit that and we have
a model for Pediatric high grade glioma
for children we tested the drug by
itself on our pre-clinical model for
Pediatric High glioma and like they
found in the humans were pancreatic
cancer it didn't do anything
however when we use the calorie
restricted ketogenic diet uh with the
vimastat it was unbelievably powerful
and we have to we used far lower
dosaging the dosages now could be
reduced to very very minimal dosages
um what happens is the ketogenic diet
acts as a facilitator to facilitate the
delivery of drugs to Target which is
really remarkable
so not only does it lower the blood
sugar it it acts as a facilitator of
drug delivery to the Target therefore
you don't need nearly as much drug and
the drug that gets to the Target is
super powerful can you talk about a
little bit that's I'm curious how that
is or do you know mechanistically what's
going on well for brain we've shown for
two small mods that it's not it seems to
facilitate delivery through the
blood-brain barrier of small molecules
the exact mechanism by which that
happens is not known I had a grant to
look into this but it for whatever
reason it wasn't approved but what we do
what we do know is when we look at the
brain of mice that have had these drug
treatments in the presence or absence of
ketogenic diets we find threefold more
drug On Target when the drug is in the
brain on on the on the tumor when
administered with the ketogenic diet so
clearly uh it's facilitating delivery of
small molecules through the blood-brain
barrier
um you know we we could figure out later
on what the mechanism would be but but
the effect is clearly obvious and
documented so uh so this then becomes a
real important way to deliver small
molecules I think to children and adult
in fact in adults we've done it in both
in both Pediatric and adults
um a way to kill cancer cells again very
powerful with minimal toxicity uh again
the whole thing for managing cancer is
you want to annihilate the tumor cells
gradually without causing any uh harm to
any normal cells or tissues in the body
and we can do we can do this this is
what the future will be yeah and I think
that kind of ties into my next question
so my question was
targeting specific cancer cells without
doing damage to uh healthy cells and I
think it ties back to your mention of
Otto Weber again I'd love to have you
talk about what the Warburg effect is
and ultimately what was he studying 100
years ago I think our audience would
know something about it without an
enormous amount yeah well uh Sam Apple
uh a New York Times he wrote the book
ravenous uh the history of Otto werber I
I have his biography by Hans Krebs
um out of war bonds Krebs of the Krebs
cycle yeah you know he's he uh he he was
a he he was a postdoctoral associate
without a Warburg wow I work closely
with Richard Veitch the the late Richard
Veitch she passed away a couple of years
ago Veach and I would speak all about
this constantly vich was Hans krebs's
last student so I had an opportunity to
speak with Veach and of course Krebs new
Warburg real well and so I had this kind
of a train of of connection between
between Warburg Krebs to beach to me but
I read warburg's work very very
carefully I looked at many many of his
of his papers I I replicated a much of
what what he has found his argument was
that all cancer cells are initiated by a
shift in energy Metabolism from using
oxygen to using energy without oxygen
and energy without oxygen is
fermentation if you jog or if you sprint
or swim fast or whatever your muscles
will burn energy faster than the oxygen
can can can really can relieve the the
lactic acid deficit so we are we are all
of our bodies contain the uh the
glycolytic pathway where like for
example in an epileptic seizure the
blood fills up with lacticab brain
throws out tremendous lactic acid
because sometimes the person stops
breathing during the epileptic seizure
and you get tremendous this lactic acid
buildup but this is only temporary as
soon as oxygen comes back into the
system the systems are restored to using
oxygen oxidative phosphorylation energy
through oxygen during a heart attacks
you know we we stop breathing the heart
stops pumping blood and you see
tremendous lactic acid and the other a
product of the
glutamanolysis pathway the glutamine
waste waste product is succinic acid so
you see lactic acid and succinic acid
buildup in the bloodstream very rapidly
uh when during uh brief heart obviously
these are heart attacks that would be
where where where function would be
restored so we see that those are the
waste products of fermentation but they
they provide tremendous quick energy but
they it cannot be sustained it's not a
non-sustainable you can only do this for
a short period of time in normal cells
the cancer cell does this as a constant
permanent locked in fermentation so and
that didn't happen overnight it took
long periods of time as Warburg said
long period of time to replace oxidative
phosphorylation with substrate level
phosphorylation which is energy without
uh oxygen right so the can the cancer
cells and and every major cancer that we
have looked at are all fermenters lung
cancer colon cancer bladder cancer
breast cancer they're all similar they
all ferment so that means they're all
the same very similar you can use the
same strategy to kill cancer no matter
one organ or what tissue it happens to
be in we have found I I did massive
studies looking for any cancer cell that
would have a normal structure and
function of the mitochondria and I have
found none none of the major cancers
that we know of has normal function of
mitochondria that means they're getting
their energy from fermentation what does
that mean they ferment they get energy
without oxygen right this is what
Warburg showed he showed that a rat that
it would have a tumor if you gave the
rat cyanide cyanide blocks oxfast
instantly that's why you know that James
Joan they drank the Kool-Aid and they
all died very rapidly from the cyanide
but you can give a a tumor bearing rat
cyanide it kills the rat instantly but
the tuber cells are unaffected by the
cyanide and and we did the same thing in
our in our lab here we showed these
tumor cells live without oxygen they
could live in cyanide so how are they
living without oxygen they're fermenting
that means energy without oxygen and
then we interrogated all of the
different fuels to figure out what are
the fuels that drive the fermentation
and the two fuels are the sugar glucose
and the amino acid glutamine we none of
it none of the other amino acids uh you
know or sugars can do this
um uh and you have to have two things
you have you have to have an ability to
use these fuels and you have to have a
logistic issue which is the abundance of
the fuel in the micro environment so yes
the cancer cell can ferment a little bit
of some asparagine or one of these other
problem is there's none of that around
and in order to drive the Beast you have
to have a sufficient level of fuel uh
when oxygen is not there and the most
abundant fuels massively are glucose and
glutamine so those are the two fuels
that are driving the majority of cancers
so they can't use we have not found any
cancer cell that can replace glucose and
glutamine with fatty acids or Ketone
bodies right probably becomes very clear
how to manage cancer you know when it
makes sense and this this may be a shot
in the dark but that the the initiation
of the cancerous cell happens in a part
of the body where oxygen is not properly
being delivered to that part of the body
is that something that's been studied
and I'm curious does that make sense
absolutely Warburg showed that
intermittent hypoxia will chronically
chronically damage oxidative
phosphorylation there's two things that
has to have that have to happen number
one the damage must be chronic it cannot
be acute acute damage like cyanide kills
the cell you can never get a cancer cell
from a dead cell number two
the cell has to be able to adapt and
transition to fermentation metabolism
itself so we have some cells in our body
that rarely have ever form cancer
neurons of the brain the cardiac
myocytes these kinds of cells cannot
survive on fermentation metabolism so
you rarely have ever find tumors from
brain neurons or from cardiac myocytes
because they do not have the capacity or
capability to prolong to survive under
prolonged fermentation they die so they
die so you have to have cells that have
the capability of slow adaptation from
an oxygen driven metabolism to a
fermentation driven metabolism and those
are most of the organs in our body so
lung can do this liver can do this
breast conducive colon can do this all
these cells have the capacity to shift
from oxfast to fermentation whereas
neurons of the brain cardiac myocytes
and even some skeletal muscles that they
can't form so when you hear sarcoma
means of muscle cancer but it's actually
the the sheets around the muscle it's
not that it's not the uh striated muscle
cells themselves so again you have to
this is the process so once you
understand
this uh then it then you have a clear
path for management because you really
know what their weakness is you really
know how to shift the body's energy
metabolism away from carbohydrates into
fats and Ketone bodies making the cancer
cells vulnerable and then you come in
with low-dose drugs that are that become
highly strategic and and Powerful uh
when administered under the right
condition and the results that we're
getting in both the pre-clinical models
dogs uh humans that do this it's
unbelievable so uh it's the future it's
it's just going to take time for The
Establishment to recognize and the
people themselves uh to recognize that
this cancer most of these aggressive
cancers can in fact be manageable and I
don't like the term terminal uh cancer
who I who says it's terminal did you try
metabolic therapy on this I can't tell
you how many stage four cancer patients
are out there for a variety of different
tissues and they're all doing they're
still alive are they cured I have no
idea but they're living a hell of a lot
longer than they would have ever lived
or were predicted to live by by the
oncology community so it can't be as
simple as optimization of mitochondrial
functions systemically right that sounds
like a vast oversimplification if we can
get the mitochondria producing energy
more effectively a systemically the
body's less likely to switch over to
these fermentation processes there's got
to be some other
factors that play in right so I would
assume that people who are highly
aerobically fit anaerobically fit still
have predispositions of cancer I can't
imagine they're just kind of wipes it
out I think I I think that's true to
some extent but the incidents are
generally much less like obesity has now
replaced smoking as one of the highest
risk factors for for cancer yeah most
folks that are really fit like the
CrossFit guys and and these people that
are that are really you know a robe they
do a lot of exercise they eat they eat
the right Foods highly nutritious Foods
uh restricted and this kind of thing
their incidence of cancer is generally
much much less than those folks that
don't do any of these kinds of things we
know what the origin of cancer is and
that is damage to oxidative
phosphorylation and that could be due to
viral infections you can give Hepatitis
A papilloma virus hepatitis C they will
damage mitochondria intermittent hypoxia
sleep apnea chronic inflammation one has
to be careful over exercising or or
taking all kinds of supplements and
things you have to be always always
cognizant of the influence on other on
what we call General metabolic
homeostasis but I would say in general
those who are fit Eat Right exercise
their risk of cancer is generally far
far less than those folks that are
morbidly obese and have a number of
other risk factors like type 2 diabetes
and these kinds of things so there's a
clear uh a relationship between these
physiological States so it sounds like
you've mentioned General metabolic
homeostasis it sounds like there if
there's a shift in either direction that
can potentially be you know I don't I
don't know uh precisely about that all I
know is that if you're if you can keep
your mitochondria healthy by whatever
diet and lifestyle you have
uh the probability of getting cancer is
extremely rare how do we know this we
know this by looking at the at the
health status of folks on the planet
Aboriginal tribes who follow their
traditional diet and lifestyle and that
was clearly documented by the uh
humanitarian physician Albert Schweitzer
when he evaluated these various African
tribes that let that lived according to
their traditional ways and I think he
had 40 000 evaluations and not one case
of cancer clearly
these kinds of tribes and this is known
for the aboriginals of Australia this is
known for the rainforest people and and
this was known for the Eskimo or I
should say the Inuits these folks cancer
was extremely rare in traditional groups
of people it's very hard to get cancer I
mean you really have to abuse the hell
out of your body to get cancer but you
know we we evolved uh for hundreds of
thousands of years in a Paleolithic diet
lifestyle where carbs were not part
carbo High carbohydrate purely uh poorly
processed or processed foods high
carbohydrate processed foods did not
exist in our environment for hundreds of
thousands of years uh you know we were a
gathering we had plenty of exercise
you're always looking for something to
eat it's with you can go back and read
the the Paleolithic literature on how we
as a species survived uh the Neolithic
period we began to cultivate grains
which obviously led to the formation of
civilizations around of of food sources
rice and corn and wheat and this kind of
thing but then within the last 80 or 90
years or or less even we started to
develop highly processed foods foods
that are packaged that have long shelf
lives I I have a I use a Twinkie here I
bought these Twinkies 10 years ago and
they're still in the package and when I
show them to the students they they look
like they're ready to eat you know this
is not natural this is this kind of
stuff where you have all these chemicals
in the product this puts your body at
risk for damage it's it's a diet a
lifestyle issue for this cancer cancer
is a diet lifestyle issue so we are in
this civilized world now we have fast
foods on every corner for many and many
of the Cities people are sitting in
traffic
ingesting uh toxic air sitting in front
of a computer uh they're not getting the
level of exercise the nutritious Foods
uh or that we had during the Paleolithic
period so I think awareness simply
becomes what what we need to do and as I
said we we have an obesity epidemic if
people were really concerned about
preventing cancer and we're frightened
if they would that we would not have an
obesity epidemic so uh these things
things are so it's up to individuals
knowledge they should know what they
need to do to reduce their risk yeah and
Tom talk to me about these these young
humans these kids who are having like
glioblastoma and brain cancers so it's
obviously not their lifestyle that's
leading to that what would what would
kind of pull the trigger on that well
you know as I said a lot of people were
asking me about that and
um developmental abnormalities we know
what because every tumor that we've
looked at whether in the child or in the
adult has has the same metabolic readout
they're fermenters so how did their
mitochondria become damaged or corrupted
uh during some developmental process was
it a chemical carcinogen uh what was it
what was the exposure we don't the
answer is we don't know the only thing
we can know is that when the tumor
develops its biochemistry is dissimilar
very similar to that of the tumor in the
adult now when we started the
conversation you said that we you
measure some markers of metabolic
function metabolic Health can you talk a
little bit about those like what you
guys are measuring to determine yeah
it's in this Continuum yeah I think you
know when we do a blood work analysis
and my colleagues that that are treating
cancer as a metabolic disease the the
first thing the first thing we look at
is the blood and we do a comprehensive
analysis of the blood what's the
triglyceride level triglycerides are
indicative low triglycerides are good uh
high triglycerides put you at risk for
cardiovascular disease a lot of folks
have parasite infections uh the the HDL
LDL ratios are off a lot of the blood
markers are off and and you say to
yourself well they got type 2 diabetes
their their insulin level is that they
have problems with insulin they have
problems with glucose they have problems
they have high blood blood pressure
hypertension they they have a lot of
different things that you can pick up
with blood markers so they're already at
a metabolic homeostasis so the question
is how you bring them back and they the
answer is what we try to do and again
this I don't want to say it's a blanket
approach for everyone and again I don't
do any of this but my colleagues do and
we're writing the treatment protocol so
the Physicians actually have a a handle
on the whole thing you know we try to
get them to stop eating carbohydrates
um for as long as we can like 10 days to
14 days all of a sudden they their blood
they start getting into the the glucose
Ketone index Zone and you start to see
trigly you start to see all the markers
coming back online if they have
parasites you can give them an
anti-parasitic as a matter of fact one
of the anti-parasitics
mbendazole uh a worm parasite drug
also targets the metabolism in the tumor
cells so the parasite and and the cancer
cell use a common form of energy and
when you you know so it's unbelievable
the the parasite drug now and what
really kills me and gets me up very very
upset is that in India you can buy this
embendazole for about 50 cents a tablet
and as soon as the industry realized it
was a useful for managing cancer in the
United States they make it now three
hundred and fifty dollars a tablet but
the same for the same this is what we do
we I call it scarelli the drugs which
mean by Martin scorelli he was the most
hated man in America he jammed the
prices of everything up everybody got
really angry with him well well the
industry does many of the same kinds of
things as soon as a drug is realized to
have some therapeutic benefit against
cancer uh it's it's all already the
price is jacked up to exorbitant levels
this shouldn't this is in my mind this
is immoral to do something like this so
uh um but anyway we we're learning more
and more about various kinds of drugs
that by themselves may not have the full
power but when you put the package
together with the diet uh lifestyle drug
combos uh you start to see tremendous
therapeutic benefit where cancer cells
can be gradually eliminated without
without causing uh minimal if any
toxicity to the rest of the body as a
matter of fact
the patients who come out of the press
pulse therapeutic strategy so the
patient comes into the clinic as they
said he has many comorbidities besides
cancer so the idea is get a whole get
get a grab hold of is bring them back to
some State uh then we do the post uh
um dosage timing and scheduling and then
we gradually hammer away at the patient
interestingly enough diabetes goes away
hypertension goes away high blood
pressure goes away and the cancer
becomes managed so the person emerges
from metabolic therapy a hell of a lot
healthier than they were before they
entered into this so this is this is
unbelievable this is the way it's going
to happen and how long if people want
this this will be what they can get how
long is that typical intervention
someone comes into your clinic or and to
work with the Physicians you're working
with and and what is the typical
political Direction it's very individual
it's very individual some people have to
bite the bullet for a year or two other
others seem to respond really really
fast so again it's a very individual
thing you know how motivated is the
patient how compliant is the patient a
lot of This falls on the shoulders of
the patient yeah so the patient has the
readouts like if you look at our our
paper that we published on Pablo Kelly
from Devin England who was diagnosed
with a glioblastoma and he uh he was
given only nine months to live he didn't
want any radiation no chemo no radiation
no steroids no surgery nothing so he
just took the metabolic therapy and
there everybody said he was crazy and he
did all this so the tumor the tumor grew
very very slowly and after three years
she had it uh surgically to both
um and they said oh it was at first it
was an inoperable tumor that after three
years of metabolic therapy it became
operable
um so he had most of it taken out and
um you know he had I have five years of
of daily glucose Ketone index
measurements so the paper shows every
person in the world world that want to
looks at what Pablo did look at what he
did every single day we have the dates
the time when he took when he measured
his blood glucose and ketones and then
but but now Pablo is nine year Survivor
the glioblastoma is still there is Pablo
cured the answer is no is Pablo alive
the answer is yes it says quality of
life good absolutely he has an
occasional seizure but he gets along
with himself he has a family now that he
didn't have he's got a two kids that he
so I mean how long will Pablo live we
have no idea but he's alive now far
longer than he would have ever been was
ever expected to live so so the answer
to your your question bet is we don't
know because a lot of these folks are
are still in the in the pipeline they're
still surviving they have a good quality
of life they're living far longer than
they were expected to live and they're
all considered terminals stage four
kinds of cancers we've seen it with
breasts we've seen it with colon uh
we've seen eat it with liver we've seen
it with all these different kinds of
cancers so people say well why are there
no political trials if this is so
important and the question is who's
going to pay for the clinical trial
right a company that would realize that
none of the drugs they're pushing are
really important and we're going to
right think about it it doesn't make
sense right totally makes sense so and
the other thing too is who's trained to
do this and the answer is not many
Physicians even know about what I just
said you know the Mayo Clinic Physicians
think glucose has no role one of my one
of the people with cancer emailed me and
see what the Mayo Clinic and the person
said glucose had nothing to do with
cancer and I said what are these people
living under a rock I mean we published
other people have published so many
papers showing that there's a direct
relationship between how fast your
cancer grows and the level of sugar in
your blood glucose so I mean this is
common knowledge to those of us who know
about energy metabolism sure is there a
camp opposing your review on cancer
right now so is there a camp saying that
glucose doesn't matter or the research
you guys are saying is ineffective no
there's no Camp because the evidence the
scientific evidence is overwhelming the
problem is is that the folks that say uh
glucose has nothing to do with cancer uh
knows to them no zero about the biology
of the disease they're treating yeah and
this is another scary point that I I
feel that's a tragedy of monumental
proportions that
um most many I don't know about most but
certainly far many more than there
should be are clueless about the biology
of the disease they're treating patients
with uh they never heard what I just
said to you is unknown then and the
other thing is they become extremely
unfortunately defensive they say well if
it were so important I would have heard
about it
um well who's going to go spread the
word that cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease because if you go to
the NCI website the first thing they see
about cancer is cancer is a genetic
disease so how could the National Cancer
Institute of the United States be so
profoundly wrong in their understanding
of what cancer is so they give grants to
the top hospitals to study cancer and
most of that stuff is hunting for Gene
targets you know you even hear it
advertised on TV at night oh this
patient has an egfr receptor the
epidermal growth factor receptor and
we're going to use this special
immunotherapy what the hell is that
they're fermenters for crying out loud
the tumors are fermenting you want to
kill them you take away their
fermentable fuels if you target the egfr
receptor yeah you'll kill a few cancer
cells but here's the problem the egfr
receptor is on some of our normal cells
and all of a sudden you start blowing
out somebody's liver and kidneys as a
result of trying to kill their tumor
cells so you run the risk of what we
call hyperprogressive disease we don't
want it metabolic therapy eliminates all
that kind of stuff and this could just
be speculates on but it sounds like
you're talking about intervention that
requires
a nutrition maybe exercise lifestyle
interventions and maybe the occasional
pharmaceutical intervention that lower
dose whereas it sounds like the the
genetic approach is mostly you know
Pharmaceuticals immunotherapies things
that are going to be a little bit more
medically inclined so there could be
some attachment there to you know that
that mid perhaps being one of the
motivating factors they can drive more
research
well yeah but what are the research
they're driving more of the same we have
over 1600 people a day dying from cancer
it gets worse every year you know breast
cancer has replaced heart is the number
one killer women so you start to ask
yourself now I'm not saying we throw out
all the different tools that we have in
in in in in the available to us I just
think uh chemotherapy could be
completely reevaluated uh as to the
dosage and timing of which you're giving
these patients radiation therapy uh
could be a strategic uh when used in the
appropriate way the tumor cells seem to
become more more susceptible to
radiation therapy I I accept the brain I
I would say never the human brain should
never under any condition be a radiated
period uh it could in fact we publish
big papers showing how most of the GBM
patients are dying as the result of the
standard of care itself as much as it is
for the tumor and that has to stop that
that's one of the things that that
really that really has to stop but but
you know you use immunotherapy therapies
for example they target cells that have
a similar kind of epitope on their
surface so if we use metabolic therapy
to Pare down the majority of the tumor
remove the blood vessels reduce the
inflammation the surviving cells after
that treatment May in fact all have a
common epitope because they were able to
still hang on despite all of these trees
now an immunotherapy could come in as
the final step in eliminating the final
tumor cells again you don't do it at the
beginning you do it after you've
shrunken this thing down and make it
much more manageable even surgery is far
more effective if you have a small
circumscribed mass than if you have this
big Angry ugly thing everything
everything is there it's just that you
need to do it in the right context
because once you understand the biology
of the problem like we do then a lot of
these things could be used in a much
greater uh with greater efficacy so
again
um we know we know what we need to do we
have all the tools necessary we just
have to rearrange the okay
mom you think about ketogenic that
should be used prophylactically to help
people or maybe on like a yearly basis
or a bi-annual basis you know I don't
know what to say about that
um like a lot of people do water only
fat anything you can bring your gki down
uh to 2.0 or below is going to be highly
therapeutic just in general for
everybody yeah oh yeah oh yeah a lot of
a lot of these Health gurus are out
there to get their gkis down
um how long would you want to do that
that's another question right you know
what are only fasting will do it but
it's hard
um you know I did it you know it's
really it's really how long did it take
you to get into that state well I mean I
I went three days and I still didn't get
into the full state but I tell you
what's easier is if you go for like 10
or 12 days on zero carbohydrate just uh
whatever you eat have very very
extremely low carbs low glycemic uh the
jump then to water only fasting becomes
much less stressful yeah the brain all
of our brains are addicted to glucose
yeah
um and boy it's to try to break that
addiction is just as can can be just as
uncomfortable as breaking an addiction
to nicotine uh to alcohol to any kind of
a drug so again we're addicted and we're
trying to remove the addiction but we we
evolved as a species that never was
addicted to glucose so
um so we also have to recognize that's
our natural state is unaddicted to
glucose or maybe we were addicted we
just didn't have access to it and such
well we haven't that's why yeah but
that's why we evolved to love sweets uh
because they never were part of the the
natural environment honey okay well you
have to uh risk your face getting stung
ten times uh by bees just to get the
sweet from the honey or fruits during
their ripe season so uh but these were
TR these were seasonal things they
weren't year-round things now we have
year-round hype highly processed
carbohydrates all the time in the diet
putting us at risk for all kinds of
things now where you sit on
um supplemental ketones
you know Dom is a big guy on
supplemental ketones I I think that um
if your blood sugar is not reduced
you're going to piss out the ketones uh
very quickly so you you really need to
lower your blood sugar to have
supplemental ketones uh provide a more
powerful effect so people can't go out
and say okay I'm going to take this ice
cream cone or or or or this burrito or
whatever the hell I'm going to eat and
uh to make it I'm going to take
supplemental ketones no no no that's not
you can I think we can use supplement
once the patient is in therapeutic
ketosis uh supplemental ketones can
force higher can push the the could
potentially lower glucose more as Dom as
Dom showed and Elevate ketones more so
again it puts more pressure on tubers so
don't forget our
all of my research is focusing on
killing cancer cells
um uh without toxicity that's our that's
our laser focus how do we kill cancer
how many different ways can we kill
tumor cells uh without causing toxicity
and if supplemental ketones can push
these cancer cells over the brink a
little bit faster we're we're all for it
and we have some experiments that we're
planning to do adding them to the diet
drug cocktail
um I think I first heard you on Peter
Ortiz in 2018 what has changed in your
approach or your belief system in the
last five years
well I I I've collected more hard
evidence to support uh what I'm saying
and we've published more case reports of
humans uh that have engaged in this
stage four breast cancers brain cancer
liver cancer so I'm working with
Physicians uh where we're we're using
metabolic therapy to treat humans we're
also learned uh we as I said we
developed a really good model for
Pediatric high grade glioma and we uh uh
in very young mice and we're testing
diet drug cocktails and we're absolutely
convinced that we were shocked to see
how powerful uh ketogenic diets were uh
with different kinds of drugs that were
considered toxic when used alone so I've
become even more certain that what I'm
saying is correct mainly because of the
research that we have done and the
outcomes that we have seen we you see
diet drug cocktails he's referring to
cancer cancer drugs specifically or
actually like things known to to
decrease body weight and blood sugar no
uh for cancer specifically okay I I you
know I I I
I I know a lot of the guys on the
CrossFit uh world and um you know those
guys are always super healthy and
they're always they're always doing all
these kinds of things you know I I I
think it's great to prevent cancer if
you know if you know that you can stay
in these in these states for cancer
prevention but you know most people in
the country that that have cancer they
it's they have cancer they want to know
what they can do now that yes they say
oh yes I know I shouldn't have been
overweight yes I know I should have
smoked yes I know I should add more
exercise yeah blah blah blah but now I
have cancer what are you gonna do for me
and as I said you know when you have a a
a 1600 people over it's almost now 1700
people a day dying from cancer and the
ones that survive don't forget we have a
million uh five uh new cases diagnosed
and we have a lot of cancer survivors
from standards of care but man a lot of
them are beat up severely uh from the
mass of radiation and poisonous
chemicals and their digestion is screwed
up their their mental health is screwed
up their their hormonal balances are
screwed up their gut is screwed up
um as the result of being treated
inappropriately with very toxic
procedures so again the the goal here is
to manage the disease effectively
without having those horrible adverse
consequences of the current situation
and I know for a fact I know absolutely
for a fact that this will be the
standard of Care at some point in the
future yeah but there are large you know
resistance uh to this uh on all but they
don't it's not a blowback it's just they
don't ignore it they just don't discuss
it uh you know
um or they'll pressure brush it off like
a lot of people many people will say oh
it has to be repeated
it's been repeated hundreds and hundreds
of times don't you read the literature
that argument doesn't hold has to be
repeated if it were so important I would
have learned about it well why didn't
you learn about it in medical school you
should have learned about it there no
they're talking about cancer as a
genetic disease not a metabolic disease
so you can go right through the list of
things that are in the way the the walls
that prevent metabolic therapy become
from becoming the standard of care
um do you have a specific ratio of
macronutrients that you advocate for
people getting into a ketogenic state to
get into this um ratio it's hard as I
said I've seen people with a vegan
Stewart I've seen carnivores do it I've
seen Mediterranean guys do it but you
know if vegans have trouble they might
want to do carnivore carnivore has
trouble they might want to do vegan but
I I usually plants it's harder to get
into the Zone with plants uh from my
experience because plants have more
carbs than than meat
um don't forget we evolved this
omnivores so so we can we can you know
we are very flexible in our diets also
you have to deal with cultural issues
religious and cultural issues on diets
but but you know if you're really
concerned stop eating completely just do
water only fasting uh you know if you're
worried about eating this or that
because water only fasting will bring
you into state of therapeutic ketosis no
question about it but then you'd want to
maintain that and then you have to
decide what you can and cannot eat in
order to maintain the gki ratio
um Thomas there anything that we I know
there's an enormous amount of stuff that
we could discuss is there anything
that's super important that we haven't
discussed that the listener should know
about your research and what you're
currently studying uh well as I said
we're right now we're perfecting dosage
timing and scheduling
um and that's considered unsexy science
you know uh what's the mechanism and
they always want to know what to make I
would rather say what's the outcome uh
let's look at do you have something
that's really effective and and yeah we
do okay how can we perfect it how do we
make it even better than it is
um and again that comes to dosage timing
and scheduling so
um and we're learning some of these
repurposed drugs some of these kinds of
things
um that are uh so so yeah we're just
trying to find the best way that we can
maintain uh highest uh uh quality of
life progressions free survival and an
improved overall survival uh I I and we
haven't cured uh the only thing I I can
say that we've cured as a dog uh with
mast cell tumor on his face and I
published that paper in in in in in in
Frontiers and nutrition and um that dog
uh at seven years old developed a mast
cell tumor on the on the lip which grew
interestingly enough the the woman was
told that she the dog should have
radiation or suggested and she didn't
want it the pet owner and um she put the
dog on a on a vegan diet a a a raw
vegetable and steamed fish diet and the
cucumor grew faster so so uh for it even
got bigger and then she heard what we
were saying and she got the raw chicken
uh with the bone in it uh some fish oil
raw egg cut the dog's calories by 40 and
within four or five months this tumor uh
disappeared completely and followed this
this dog uh until it died at 15 and a
half years there was a pinball pit bull
and they they generally don't live more
than 14 years well this dog lived to be
15 years the cancer never never came
back so it thought the dog died from um
uh heart failure So when you say that's
the real only I don't know that's the
way I think you know you're cured so
you're a young guy you know God forbid
you get cancer you do metabolic therapy
and you die at 97 from from heart
failure but not the cancer never
returned you can say on your deathbed
that I was cured from cancer yeah but
but you know and always because people
fear that it always could come back at
some point right so if it never comes
back you know you were cured is there
someone that listeners can actually
access that information once you publish
it do you have a specific yeah well
that's an important point because you
know some people say well where's the
evidence I publish it okay so you just
put my name into Google
I'd say Publications and all the papers
will pop up yeah and people are free to
read the details of of what I'm saying
the actual experimental design and all
of the things that that that we do and
uh the support most of our support comes
from private foundations and
philanthropy there are folks that uh
give us money because they know we're on
the right path to the resolution of
cancer making it a disease that's quite
manageable and they feel they'd like to
be part of that you know so there are
good there are good people out there
that say listen this is where this is
where it's action now there are a lot of
folks I don't say a lot but there are
some folks that are entrepreneurs and
they're trying to figure out how how to
how to make money on this whole system
um which is only natural because the
business of America is business and uh
I'm not opposed to anybody who can
figure out how to make money on this
metabolic therapy but right now uh we
have seen a lot of them scratching their
head try to figure out how how can we
how can we make a lot of money on diet
on diet drug of repurposed drug none of
these things are are you have to Pat you
know people make a lot of money on
patented things and um you know how do
you patent diet drug therapies where you
just kind of put them all together it's
kind of hard because it's very hard to
protect something like this and also the
patient themselves become a prime uh a
prime participant and the manager you
see
I'm not into that
um I have a great job at Boston College
as a professor if someone else would
like to develop a clinic or or set up
clinics to do this for patients then my
job is to prove that it works but I I
get pleasure out of sea people who are
walking the planet who who should have
been dead uh telling me they feel great
they look great uh that's rewarded
enough for me yeah um and to know more
importantly to know that the science
behind what I'm saying can account for
the outcome of the procedures that's
what the most exciting thing is because
once you understand the biology and
biochemistry then you know what you need
to do to manage this this disorder
without toxicity and when you do that
you start to see uh the outcomes that
would be predicted note based on the
science so with respect to dosage and
duration that will be posted just as a
research study and we'll be able to find
that on Google yeah well those is timing
is scheduling are still in the process
we're we're our big protocol will be
dealing with that and again the
physician will now have to become
knowledgeable about the metabolism of
their patients to know which dosage
timing and scheduling might work best
for them
um so again it's it's not like one shoe
fits all uh now you really need to be a
physician you need to practice what you
do you really need to now to know what
your patient's metabolism is
um you need to know the blood work you
need to know these kinds of things and
then you make a decision uh you work
with a team of people uh nutrition
dietitians oncologists that understand
the the the the the mechanism behind
what they're doing so again there's
going to be a lot of retraining uh but a
lot of these guys could could do it
right away if they just understood the
concepts and then the other situation is
will the system allow them to do this so
the standard of care is it should never
have been written in Granite but it
seems to have been written Granite it's
very hard to overturn these procedures
especially for brain cancer which is
killing the majority of people that have
glioblastoma the treatment itself what
you're doing to these poor folks I I
published papers after paper after paper
showing exactly how radiation steroids
of the temazolamide are actually killing
the patients and when like Pablo didn't
do any of that he's doing fine and then
they say oh no he's a fluke he's only
one of a kind well how many other flukes
would we have if we if we did what Pablo
did the the God forbid we do because can
you imagine if if we get a large number
of people living nine years with a with
a diagnosed glioblastoma you know this
would overturn a whole a whole way of
doing things right now but you know I'm
not I I don't care what I need to do is
know how many people we can keep alive
with that with the quality of life that
they're and they feel good about
themselves that's that's the goal does
it make a difference if it's breast
cancer colon cancer lung cancer bladder
cancer doesn't make any difference we
want to see people surviving longer than
they should have ever been predicted to
survive I appreciate your passion so
much it's so clear to me you found what
your calling is in life and uh it shows
and I'm so grateful for you making the
time and ultimately continue to do what
you do supporting us and I'm sure
there's a lot of people that are going
to benefit from this podcast uh so Tom C
free thank you so much for making it I
remember Don or Travis Christopherson
who wrote the book tripping over the
truth yeah rise of the metabolic
approach to cancer his foundation of
foundation for metabolic therapy
supports our work okay anybody would
like to contribute to our research and
and uh philanthropy every paper that we
publish you'll look at the people who
have supported us and we we named them
so we put them in the name that we put
their names on the acknowledgment
section of who supported the work and
that tells them that they're that their
support is actually being seen in
peer-reviewed Publications yeah we all
know someone who has cancer or will get
cancer and I'm sure that's um that
information will be well received
hopefully we'll handle uh Tom thank you
for making the time uh massively
appreciated my friend okay take it easy
Ben thank you very much
foreign
that's a wrap ladies and gents thank you
so much for being part of the muscle
intelligence community
everyone always asks me to give my
takeaways from the podcast so here they
go I think uh in my opinion accusing egg
diet is an absolute essential tool for
everyone to integrate I think fasting is
an essential tool for almost everyone to
integrate there shouldn't people I think
shouldn't fast but in general one day a
month maybe three days a month or three
days a quarter three to five days a
quarter is a very good idea to optimize
metabolic function it's been shown to to
optimize for for longevity now being
shown to optimize for anti-cancer guys
just do it just work toward it right you
don't have to start with 72 hours start
with 24 work to 48 push the 72 and then
and Beyond and there's certainly
detriments to long-term fasting if you
push too hard or if you're not prepared
for it or if your body is in a massively
stressed State you can't do it or you
don't want to do it but in general doing
these extended water fasts uh will not
only fasting benefits or longevity
benefits but also have ketogenic
benefits which ultimately can prove to
be an anti-cancer eating a carbohydrate
reduced diet is just a good idea in
general or everyone or or most people if
not everyone at some point in my typical
approach is I like to approach it and it
is a seasonal way
so I know if I'm training really hard
and I'm pushing really hard I'm very
active I can handle some carbohydrates
my body can certainly handle it and just
the nature of a cyclical approach allows
your body to become more effective at
using fat for fuel ultimately using
these oxidative Pathways to generate ATP
which is important in the body and not
over driving these fermentation Pathways
like Tom talks about today and so in
general carbohydrates are not bad but
processed carbohydrates which are going
to drive blood sugar constantly is
absolutely proven to be bad so no not
all macros are created equal they do
absolutely have a different biochemical
response in the body so if I eat a
potato that may be different than a rice
cake that may be different from a
chocolate bar
and they all have different yes they
could have the same macros but they may
be very different physiological
biochemical responses in the body and
it's often The Chronic exposure no
individual food is bad in my opinion no
individual food is bad but if I do so
something constantly and chronically
that creates the state of my body and so
I really want to pay attention to what's
going into my body and what state am I
creating when I eat that or when I
consume that or even when I I
participate in those things it
influences what I call this biochemical
soup inside our body and that samples
May determines what you look like on the
outside what you feel like on the inside
and ultimately how your body performs as
well and so thank you very much to Dr
Tom C freed for joining me to clarify
the metabolic truth of cancer hopefully
you receive something a tremendous value
if you did enjoy this podcast if you did
receive some value I'd love it if you
would share at least one person you know
and love loves to live their greatest
life and embodied love ultimately who
maybe has someone who knows cancer or
has cancer or ultimately they're trying
to overcome the cancer themselves this
is a great piece of information that we
want to share this with as many people
as we possibly can if it was a little
bit complex for you go ahead and check
out the show notes where we will
simplify some of the topics and link to
some amazing products as well as some
amazing studies for you to look over
further ladies and gents Ben bukowsky
muscle intelligence podcast have a great
day and don't forget to check out our
sponsors by optimizers and use the code
muscle10 at checkout
thank you so much for tuning in to
muscle intelligence if you enjoyed
today's episode please be sure to share
it with at least one person you know
make sure you're subscribed so you never
miss an episode this podcast is for
information purposes only statements and
views on this podcast are not medical
advice this podcast including Ben
bakulski and search his claim
responsibility
from the use of information contained
here in opinions of guests are their own
and this podcast does not endorse or
accept responsibility for statements
made by guests this podcast does not
make any representations or warranties
about Guest qualifications or
credibility this podcast may contain
paid endorsements or advertisements for
products or Services individuals on this
podcast may have a direct or indirect
financial interest and products or
Services referred to here in if you
think you have a medical problem consult
a licensed physician